Personality and Behavior in Role-based Online
Games
Zhao Wang1
, Anna Sapienza2
, Aron Culotta1
, Emilio Ferrara2
1Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, USA
2
Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA
{zwang185, aculotta}@hawk.iit.edu, {annas, ferrarae}@isi.edu
Abstract—Both offline and online human behaviors are affected by personality. Of special interests are online games, where
players have to impersonate specific roles and their behaviors
are extensively tracked by the game. In this paper, we propose
to study the relationship between players’ personality and game
behavior in League of Legends (LoL), one of the most popular
Multiplayer Online Battle Arena (MOBA) games. We use linear
mixed effects (LME) models to describe relationships between
players’ personality traits (measured by the Five Factor Model)
and two major aspects of the game: the impersonated roles
and in-game actions. On the one hand, we study relationships
within the game environment by modeling role attributes from
match behaviors and vice versa. On the other hand, we analyze
the relationship between a player’s five personality traits and
their game behavior by showing significant correlations between
each personality trait and the set of corresponding behaviors.
Our findings suggest that personality and behavior are highly
entangled and provide a new perspective to understand how
personality can affect behavior in role-based online games.
Index Terms—personality, game behavior, online role-based
I. INTRODUCTION
Numerous studies from cognitive science and social science
have shown strong connections between personality and human behavior [1]–[3]. As an important part of human activity,
digital footprints are found to be closely related to user
personality. For instance, extroverts and emotionally stable
people are shown to be popular and influential on Twitter [4].
Meanwhile, personality can be successfully inferred from usergenerated contents in social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter,
and YouTube) [5]. As a modern entertainment, online games
are becoming increasingly popular, with an average time
spent in playing of more than 20 hours per week [2]. Given
the popularity achieved, these games constitute a desirable
source of data, providing valuable opportunities for researchers
to investigate potential connections between personality and
behavior. Of special interests are Multi-players Online Battle
Arena (MOBA) games, which include several social aspects
that could be influenced by personality, such as impersonating
a role and cooperating with teammates.
Here, we study one of the most popular MOBA games:
League of Legends (LoL). In LoL game scenario, each player
This work is partly supported by DARPA (grant #D16AP00115). It
does not necessarily reflect the position/policy of the Government; no official
endorsement should be inferred. Approved for public release; unlimited
distribution.
selects a specific role by impersonating a champion, i.e. a
character of the game, to conduct a series of actions during
the match. Each role is designed from the prototype of a
champion in the fairy tale and characterized by a set of
unique abilities [6]. As humans have personalities that describe
their stable behavioral patterns, champions also have attributes
that characterize their abilities in the game scenario. Players
with different personalities would have different preferences
for specific roles, which subsequently lead to different game
behaviors.
Numerous researches have been conducted to investigate the
relationship between personality and game behavior by profiling players’ personality through their actions in the game [7],
by conducting surveys to track both personality and selfreported in-game behaviors [2], and by taking demographic
effects (e.g., gender and age) into account [8]–[10]. However,
these works do not consider the different roles chosen by
players, and often rely on self-reported game actions, which
could lead to biases and inaccuracies in the data.
By extending the previous research in this field, we aim at
both studying how players’ personalities are related to their
preferences in selecting game characters and understanding
how personalities influence game behavior. We first conduct
surveys to collect the BIG-5 personality traits of players, as
discussed in Section III. Then, we combine data of players’
impersonated characters and actions provided by the official
Riot Games API.1 Our main goal is to understand: first, how
a player’s impersonated role and their match behavior are related; and second, whether knowing a player’s role and match
behavior helps to understand their personality. To this aim,
we apply Linear Mixed Effects (LME) models (Section IV)
to find the underlying relations between LoL champions (i.e.
game characters) and the actions performed during the match
(Section V). In Section VI, we analyze players’ personality
traits according to the attributes of impersonated champions
and match behaviors. Finally, in Section VII, we report the
conclusions, limitations, and future work.
II. RELATED WORK
Previous studies focused on exploring the relationship between personality and game behaviors. In [2], the authors
conduct a study based on 205 players of World of Warcraft and
1https://developer.riotgames.com/
978-1-7281-1884-0/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
arXiv:1905.08418v1 [cs.HC] 21 May 2019
find that personality traits strongly influence game behaviors.
However, this work collects game behaviors through surveys,
which might suffer from inadequacy and reliability. Authors
in [7] develop a framework to automatically collect playing
behaviors in Neverwinter Nights, and then use regression
analysis to profile 44 players through the collected behaviors.
Results suggest significant correlations between personality
and behavior in role-playing game, nevertheless, this work
does not take into account possible effects caused by different
roles. Additionally, players with different personalities are
shown to differ in: motivations for playing [11], preference
of game genres [12], selection of game characters [13], and
engagement of match behaviors [14]. Demographic variables
(e.g., gender, age) were also found to influence these aspects
of the game [8].
A great amount of work has been also devoted to study the
connections between personality and offline behavior. However, it is not clear how to transfer the related findings to have
better insights into online behavior. On the one hand, some
studies found consistencies between personality and offline behaviors as well as personality and online behaviors [15]–[18].
For instance, Agreeableness and Extraversion are shown to be
connected to playing motivations. On the other hand, there are
also works reporting inconsistencies between personality traits
and behaviors, such as inconsistency of Conscientiousness and
motivations in [19].
In the present work, we aim at shedding light on the underlying connections between personality and game behavior by
taking big-5 personality traits, role attributes, actions during
matches, and demographic factors all into account.
III. DATA
In this paper, we study the relationship between personality
and game behavior of League of Legends (LoL) players. We
first collect personality traits data through a survey containing
personality test and demographic questions.2 Then, for each
player participating in the survey, we collect their game
information (e.g., selected characters and match history) via
the official Riot Games API.1
A. League of Legends (LoL)
As one of the most popular MOBA games, LoL was first
released in 2009 and updated for nine seasons by the end
of 2018 [21]. It attracts millions of players of all ages,
nationalities, and occupations. What’s more, LoL is reported
to have over 80 million active players per month and over 27
million players every single day [22].
LoL offers a variety of options allowing players to interact
with each other in a virtual environment full of activities and
diverse game modes [23]. There are 141 unique characters
(i.e. champions in LoL), each defined by a set of special
abilities. We summarize these abilities into six main attributes
to characterize each champion:3
2An anonymized version of the dataset used in this study is available
upon request to the contact author.
3 Champions and attributes definitions (copy the link into your browser):
https://leagueoflegends.fandom.com/wiki/List of champions/Ratings
TABLE I
MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION FOR BIG-5 PERSONALTY TRAITS OF
811 VALID PARTICIPANTS
Agr Con Emo Ext Ope
Mean 4.42 4.70 4.60 3.53 4.95
Std 1.24 1.31 1.46 1.52 1.20
aWe use first 3 letters to represent trait names.
• Damage: “ability to deal damage”.
• Toughness: “ability to survive being focused”.
• Mobility: “ability to move quickly, blink or dash”.
• Utility: “ability to grant beneficial effects on allies, or
provide vision”.
• Control: “ability to disable enemies”.
• Difficulty: “a champion’s mechanical difficulty”.
Each attribute has a rating that ranges from 0 to 3, with 0
representing the weakest level and 3 representing the strongest.
Fig.1 shows examples of five different champions’ attributes.
A single match in the Summoner’s Rift (i.e. the most popular
game mode of LoL) requires two teams of five players that
compete to destroy the enemy base, and each player controls
one of the 141 champions. Therefore, the champion selection
and playing style are critical to the outcome of a match, both
of which can be strongly influenced by players’ personalities.
B. Survey
We conducted a survey to collect players’ personality traits
and demographic information. A sample of our survey is
available online.4 The questionnaire contains three categories
of questions: personality test, demographic questions, and
player identification questions.
Among various personality models, the BIG-5 framework
has emerged as the most widely accepted model to study
personality traits [24]–[26]. In our setting, we choose BIG5 Ten Item Personality Inventory (TIPI) as our personality
questionnaire, which is brief but proven to be reliable [24].
We obtain the TIPI questionnaire from PsyToolkit:5
a free
survey library that provides cognitive-psychological tests [27],
[28]. Each of the five personality dimensions, i.e. agreeableness, conscientiousness, emotional stability,6
, extraversion,
and openness is measured according to two questions of the
TIPI test [29]. Participants are asked to rate their answers
to each question on a seven-point scale ranging from 1 (i.e.
strongly disagree) to 7 (i.e. strongly agree). TABLE I shows
the mean and standard deviation for personality scores of valid
participants. Fig.2 shows examples of five different players’
personality traits. Detailed definitions of the big-5 personality
traits are provided in Section VI-B.
To control for the potential effects that demographic factors
have on personality [2], [8]–[10], we also ask for players’
demographic information (i.e. age, gender, region of the game)
and translate the survey into several languages (i.e. Korean,
Japanese, Turkish, Spanish, and Chinese) to reach out players
of different nationalities.
4https://www.psytoolkit.org/cgi-bin/psy2.5.1/survey?s=LUPWZ
5https://www.psytoolkit.org/survey-library/big5-tipi.html
6Also known as an antonym of neuroticism [24].
Fig. 1. Example of radar plots for five different champions (i.e., Alistar, Aatrox, Akali, Ahri, Bard), each defined by six attributes (we use the first three
letters as abbreviations of attribute names). We observe that every champion has its weaknesses and strengths regarding the six attributes and no champion is
designed to be perfect [20], so that champions in a team need to cooperate to win.
Fig. 2. Example of radar plots for big-5 personality traits of five different players (we use the first three letters as abbreviations of personality trait names).
Players’ big-5 personality traits are analogous to champion attributes: each player has its weaknesses and strengths regarding the five dimensions of personality
traits. Players with different personalities will have different preferences for champions.
Moreover, we ask the following identification questions: the
summoner name7
(i.e. the unique identification name of each
player); three favorite champions8
(i.e. characters a player
prefers to impersonate during the game); and the highest
champion level. These questions are used to verify that the
participant is an actual LoL player. Finally, we also record
players’ response time for each question. Specifically, for the
10 personality questions, the mean response time is 50s with
a standard deviation of 25s.
We post the survey on several platforms, such as LoL
forums,9 popular websites (e.g., Reddit), and Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT). However, despite the great interest
shown by volunteers when the survey was released, the overall
attention dramatically decayed after a few days. We then
focused on AMT, where we boost participation by providing a
0.5$ reward for each valid response. We conducted the survey
on AMT for three months (June to September 2018).
We use the following criteria to validate the authenticity of
participants. First, we remove duplicate responses having the
same summoner name or AMT worker ID. Second, we check
if a participant’s answers to the identification questions match
the information we get from the official API of LoL. Since
the identification information is only visible to a player on
their own account, we can identify false LoL players through
this process. Finally, we require a participant to have played at
least 10 matches to filter possible biases introduced by players
who only play the game a few times and have insufficient
information to assess their game behavior.
7https://na.leagueoflegends.com/en/game-info/summoners/
8https://na.leagueoflegends.com/en/game-info/champions/
9https://boards.na.leagueoflegends.com/en/
TABLE II
DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS OF 811 VALID SURVEY PARTICIPANTS
Gender Age Region
M:682 13∼20: 195 NA1 (North America): 580
F:129 21∼30: 496 EUW1 (EU West): 107
31∼40: 100 others: 124
>40: 20
aMinimum age of a LoL player is required to be 1310
bRegions are defined by server locations (check full list of regions here11)
At the end of this procedure, we finally get 811 valid
responses out of 2785 in total. TABLE II shows a summary
of the demographic statistics of verified survey participants.
Note that, since we are focusing on AMTs, the participants’
demographics are affected by AMT demographics.
C. Game Behavior Data
The Riot Games API provides easy access to LoL game
data in a secure and reliable way. For the 811 valid players, we
utilize the API to collect the record of champions a player has
impersonated, the timeline of their matches, and the specific
actions performed during each match (e.g., the number of kills,
deaths, and assists). The statistics of collected champions and
matches are shown in the histograms of Fig. 3.
IV. METHODS
In this section, we first explain the representative features of
players. Then, we describe the technical background of linear
mixed effects models and show how we apply them to explore
potential relationships between personality and game behavior.
10https://na.leagueoflegends.com/en/legal/termsofuse
11https://leagueoflegends.fandom.com/wiki/Servers
A. Features
We extracted four sets of features from the collected data:
demographic factors, big-5 personality traits, champion features, and match behaviors.
Demographic factors: age, gender, and region.
Big-5 personality traits: agreeableness, conscientiousness,
emotional stability, extraversion, and openness.
Champion features: we consider the following features to
describe the champions impersonated by each player:
• n champs: the total number of unique champions used
by each player, as the horizontal axis shows in Fig.3;
• n level6: the number of champions ranked no lower
than level six (champion level is determined by the
frequency and proficiency of its usage by a player); This
is a complementary feature of n champs, which helps to
identify a player’s performance level and characterize the
expertise of a player’s skill.
• Average attribute ratings of a player’s three favorite champions (used to measure a player’s champion preference);
• Weighted attribute ratings of a player’s top three ranked
champions (weight by the number of matches being
played with each specific champion), which is used to
measure a player’s champion skill.
Match behavior: We select the actions of top three ranked
champions of a player to represent their overall match behavior. The official API records more than 100 behavioral
features for each match, including kills, deaths, and assists
(the complete set of features can be found at official API1
webpage). However, some features are either not representative
of a player’s game behavior (e.g., visionScore) or correlated
with other features (e.g., kills, doubleKills, tripleKills, and
quadraKills are highly correlated), or not recorded for most
players (e.g., combatPlayerScore). To focus on features that
are most relevant to the playing behavior, we remove nonrepresentative features and highly correlated features, and only
keep features that are recorded for most players. By doing
so, we extract 11 significant features to describe important
aspects of the playing behavior: the total number of matches
(n matches, as the vertical axis shows in Fig.3), number
of kills, number of deaths, number of assists, winning rate,
average match duration, gold earned, gold spent, total damage
dealt, total damage taken, total heal.
B. Linear Mixed Effects Models (LME)
Previous studies have shown that both playing behaviors and
personality traits are affected by demographics (e.g., gender,
age) [2], [9]. For example, female players are more engaged
in assisting behaviors than male players, and young players
tend to be less emotionally stable than old ones [14]. However, mixing demographic effects with playing behaviors and
personality traits would impede the identification of possible
relationships between personality and game behavior.
To deal with this issue, we apply LME models, which allow
us to consider both fixed and random effects. Fixed effects
refer to variations that could be explained by the independent
variables (like in linear models) and random effects refer
to variations that could not be explained by independent
variables. By following the syntax provided in [30], we can
write the equations for mixed effects models as follows:
outcome ∼ 1 + fixed effects + (random effects|group) (1)
where an outcome (dependent) variable is explained by using
an intercept equal to 1, one or more fixed effects, and one or
more random effects allowing for variations between groups
(e.g., gender group: male, female). We use the R implementation of lme4 to perform our linear mixed effects analysis in
all the experiments [31], [32].
To model each of the three aspects: big-5 personality traits,
champion attributes, and match behavioral features, we refer
to the one being modeled as the outcome variable, while the
remaining aspects are considered to be the candidate fixed
effects (which are constant across demographic groups [33]).
Finally, we control for different demographic groups by considering them as random effects.
To assess the relative fits of the models, on the one hand,
we check their linearity, homoscedasticity, and normality of
the residuals. On the other hand, we compute the Bayesian
Information Criterion (BIC) [34], which accounts for both
the complexity and likelihood of a model. For each outcome
variable, we start with a null hypothesis which only explains
the outcome by the intercept and random effects of gender,
age, and region. Then, we incrementally add fixed effects and
select those that decrease the BIC score of the model. Finally,
we use ANOVA tests to compare the differences between the
null model and the one with the lowest BIC score. According
to the interpretation table of BIC score differences in [35],
we then determine the significance of each model and report
the one that is the most significant (i.e. the model whose BIC
score difference with the null hypothesis model is greater than
10 and has the lowest BIC score).
V. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ROLE AND MATCH BEHAVIOR
Players choose champions to conduct a series of actions
during the game and the champion’s abilities would directly
affect players’ match behaviors [36]. We start by showing the
relationship between champion usage and matches. Then, we
model champion attributes from match behavior as well as
infer specific match behavior according to champion attributes.
A. Relationship between Champions and Matches
To understand how the number of different champions used
by players varies with the number of matches being played,
we first compute the Spearman correlations between these two
components and results show that they are strongly correlated
(0.813 with p value < 0.01). Fig. 3 shows the scatter plot of
the number of champions and matches for 811 valid players.
Histograms on two axes represent the density of champions
and matches in each interval.
We can observe that the number of different champions each
player tries in their gaming history is positively correlated
with the number of matches s/he plays. Moreover, this relation
TABLE III
INFERRED CHAMPION ATTRIBUTES FROM MATCH BEHAVIOR
Control Damage Difficulty Mobility Toughness Utility
Random Effects
gender X X
age X X X X
region X X X
Fixed Effects
kills -0.34 0.79 1.05 0.81 -0.55
assists 0.62 -0.91 0.11 -0.45 0.24 0.53
deaths -0.25 0.75 -1.56 0.45
win 0.31 -0.49 -0.17 0.41
average duration 0.38 -0.41 0.51 0.30
champLevel 0.61 -0.18 0.71
goldEarned -1.18 1.35 -1.56 -1.27 -1.04
goldSpent 0.83 0.78 -0.54
totalDamageDealt -0.29
totalDamageTaken 0.19 -0.75 2.00 -0.49
totalHeal -0.20 -0.26 0.21 -1.04 0.44
a Notes apply to all the following tables:
(1) Results should be interpreted by column; Feature values are pre-processed by applying min-max normalization;
(2) For random effects, we use check marks to indicate which plays an important role;
(3) For fixed effects, we only show those with significance p<0.05;
Fig. 3. Relation between number of champions and matches for 811 players,
each point represents one player.
follows an exponential trend, which suggests that at the start
of their gaming history, players take few champions to learn
how to play the game, and later on, they are more inclined to
explore new characters.
Despite the overall trend, we find cases of players who play
most of their matches with a small number of champions, and
cases of players who explore the use of different champions
in the early stages of their gaming history. The former case
is indicative of players who tend to have extremely limited
interest in champions. The latter case is instead indicative of
players with a broad interest in exploring new options.
B. Model Champion Attributes from Match Behavior
Each champion has specific abilities and these abilities
would subsequently affect match behaviors, thus we are interested in understanding how do match behaviors reflect champion abilities. We focus on the six main attributes that characterize champion abilities: control, damage, difficulty, mobility,
toughness, and utility. We then formulate this problem as
LME models for champion attributes. Here, each attribute is
modeled with the 11 match features as candidate fixed effects
and three demographic factors as candidate random effects.
TABLE III shows the relationship between champion attributes and the set of most relevant match behaviors. We
observe that: (1) demographic features play an important role
as random effects to model attributes of damage, difficulty,
mobility, and utility; (2) the 11 match behavior features are
reflective of champion attributes, which can be backed up
by the statistics of matched games from Champion.gg,12 a
website that provides in-depth and accurate statistics about
the overall performance of each champion in LoL. Take the
attribute “Damage” for an example, TABLE III shows that
a large number of kills and deaths but a small number of
assists are indicative of high damage rating of the champion.
According to the statistics in Champion.gg, we find that the
top five champions conducting a large number of kills and
a small number of assists are indeed champions with high
damage ratings. For instance, the champion Quinn, having
damage rating of 3 (the highest level), being ranked 2nd for
average number of kills, and being in the lowest ranks for
number of assists.13
C. Infer Match Behavior according to Champion Attributes
After modeling champion attributes from match behavior,
we are then interested in understanding how the choice of
certain champions affect playing behaviors in the game. We
answer this question by fitting a LME model for each match
feature. In this model, we use the six champion attributes as
candidate fixed effects and the three demographic factors as
candidate random effects.
12https://champion.gg
13https://champion.gg/champion/Quinn/Top?league=gold
TABLE IV
INFERRED MATCH BEHAVIORS ACCORDING TO CHAMPION ATTRIBUTES
Kills Assists TotalDamageTaken TotalHeal
Random Effects
gender X X
age X X X X
region X X X X
Fixed Effects
control -0.09 -0.17 -0.16
damage 0.11 -0.16 -0.15
difficulty -0.05
mobility -0.08
toughness -0.10 0.25 0.09
utility -0.06 0.08 -0.07 0.05
We fit one LME model for each of the 11 match features and
identified significant LME models for kills, assists, totalDamageTaken and totalHeal. TABLE IV shows the relationship
between match features and champion attributes indicated by
corresponding LME models. Results show that demographic
features also play an important role in understanding how
champion choice affects match behaviors. Moreover, the partial combination of champion attributes is indicative of specific
match behaviors. For instance, champions with low control
rating, high damage rating, and low utility rating are expected
to have more kills; champions with low damage, low mobility,
low toughness, and high utility ratings are expected to have
more assists. These relationships also reflect the statistics of
matched games from Champion.gg.12 In particular, the champion Master Yi has the following attribute ratings: Damage:3,
Control:0, Utility:0, Mobility:2, Toughness:1, Difficulty:1, and
is ranked 5th on the basis of their number of kills.
Given these results, we found that there exists an intrinsic
relation between impersonated champions and their actions
during the game. We are now interested in making a step
further to check whether a relation exists between the impersonated champion and personality. This will allow us to
understand how personality influences a player’s choice of
roles as well as to directly link their personality with the
actions performed during the game.
VI. UNDERSTANDING PERSONALITY FROM GAME
BEHAVIOR
In this section, we first show an interesting relationship
between players’ favorite champions and most skilled champions. Then, we examine how do big-5 personality traits align
with champion choices and corresponding match behaviors in
the online game environment.
A. Favorite vs Skilled Champions
To understand whether players are good at playing with
their favorite champions, we compare players’ favorite three
champions (collected in the survey) with their top three ranked
champions (collected via the official API). Results show that
for 83% of players, at least one champion is both their favorite
and skilled, while for 17% players, their favorite champions
are totally different from the skilled ones. This finding suggests
that players’ skilled champions are not always exactly their
favorite ones. In particular, players might have the tendency
of using champions that are easy to control and win despite
personal preference.
B. Understanding Personality from Game Behavior
As personality could affect champion choices and champion abilities would subsequently influence playing behaviors.
Here, we focus on understanding personality traits from impersonated roles and corresponding playing behaviors, which
would corroborate the previous results showing the existence
of associations between players’ personality and playing behaviors in online game environments [2], [17].
To explore such associations, we formulate the problem as
LME modeling tasks for the big-5 personality traits. Specifically, with champion attributes and match features as candidate
fixed effects and demographic factors as candidate random
effects, our goal is to explore relationships between personality
traits and game aspects (including champion choices and
match behaviors).
We first conduct the analysis by using all of 811 samples,
but results show weak correlations between personality and
game aspects, which might be caused by either noisy samples
or neutral personality traits (e.g., some players show neutral
ratings for agreeableness). On the one hand, to limit possible
noisy samples, which is a general problem in survey-based
studies, we follow the criteria of response time reported in [17]
and limit our samples to those whose response time for the
personality test is greater than two minutes. On the other hand,
we label each trait according to its first and third quantiles, and
only keep those whose personality score is smaller than the
first quantile (label as low) or greater than the third quantile
(label as high). This allows us to study players with obvious
differences in personalities and avoid confusions introduced
by those with neutral personality traits.
We then re-fit our LME models on the obtained sub-samples
regarding each trait and get more consistent and significant
relationships. TABLE V illustrates the correlations between
each personality trait and selected game aspects (including
champion attributes and match features). We will explain the
relationship regarding each personality trait in turn below.
Agreeableness is the tendency of getting along with others
in pleasant, satisfying relationships [29]. TABLE V shows that
the relationship between agreeableness and game behavior is
mainly affected by gender and region. In our samples, males
show lower agreeableness than females; players in region
TABLE V
UNDERSTANDING BIG-5 PERSONALITY TRAITS FROM CHAMPION ATTRIBUTES AND MATCH BEHAVIOR
Agreeableness Conscientiousness Emotional stability Extraversion Openness
Random Effects
gender X X X X
age X X X X
region X X
Fixed Effects
control -1.34 1.03 3.28 -0.72 1.59
damage -1.04 -3.82 1.47 1.45
difficulty -1.47 -1.49 -1.49 -2.34
mobility 0.76 -2.06 4.35 -4.30
toughness -1.28 -2.46 -1.61 -5.24 -6.37
utility -0.54 1.49 1.27 -4.88 2.35
kills 9.22 -5.26 8.71 17.28 5.64
deaths -8.10 -4.04 -11.9 -4.33
assists -2.92 -5.63 -4.36 -7.43
win 15.6 2.56 3.05 11.92 15.31
average duration -0.01 -0.01 0.09 -0.03 2.53
n level6 0.06 -0.04 0.07 0.12 -1.73
EUW1 (i.e., European West) show lower agreeableness than
players from other regions. Results also show that agreeableness is negatively correlated with utility in LoL, which is
different from the case in a real-life scenario [5]. Additionally,
since people with high agreeableness are expected to cooperate
well with teammates, it is reasonable to find that they are
characterized by a strong killing behavior and fewer deaths,
which is related to good cooperation with teammates and a
key component to achieve a high winning rate.
Conscientiousness is the personality trait of being careful
and having the desire to positively fulfill a task [14], [37].
According to TABLE V, the relationship between conscientiousness and game behavior is mainly affected by age,
where older players tend to have higher conscientiousness than
younger ones. Results also show that conscientious players
prefer champions with good control ability which allow for
better management in dangerous situations. The nature of
being careful and keep things under control make players more
likely to win. We also notice that conscientious players have a
relatively small number of skilled champions, which suggests
that conscientious players mainly focus on specific champions
and are not exploring new possibilities of different champions.
Emotional stability is the ability of calmly handling difficult
situations [18], [24]. Results in TABLE V show that the
relationship between emotional stability and game behavior is
mainly affected by gender and age. According to our samples,
males tend to be more emotionally stable than females; players
between 21 ∼ 30 are reported to be more emotionally stable
than others. Moreover, emotionally stable players are able to
take champions with high control and utility ratings as well
as performing more kills while keeping a low death rate.
Additionally, we observe that the average match durations
for emotionally stable players are relatively longer. All these
behaviors correspond to their ability of being stable and
productive in tough situations.
Extraversion is the trait of being outgoing and social [1], [2].
Its relationship with game behavior is affected by gender, age,
and region. In our sample, males show lower extraversion than
females, older players tend to be more extrovert than younger
ones, and players in EUW1 show lower extraversion than those
in other regions. TABLE V also indicates that extrovert players
prefer champions with high damage and mobility ratings, and
thus are prone to kill more and have a low death rate, which
leads to a high winning rate. It also shows that extrovert
players have a relatively large number of expert champions,
which means these players have a broad interest in trying
different champions. These behaviors support the outgoing,
social and optimistic aspects of being extrovert.
Openness is being characterized by high curiosity and creativity. Its relationship with game behavior is slightly affected
by gender and age. Players with high openness tend to choose
champions with high control, damage, and utility ratings,
leading to relatively more killing behaviors, fewer deaths, and
thus higher winning rate. However, we notice that players
with high openness do not have a large number of assisting
behaviors and expert champions, which differs from the reallife behavior of people with the nature of being open.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND LIMITATIONS
In this paper, we explore the relationship between personality and behavior in LoL. We collect data of players’ ingame behavior from the official Riot Games API and adopt
the Five-Factor Model to get survey-based personality traits
of LoL players. We applied linear mixed effects models to
fit our data and describe the entangled relationships between
personality and playing behaviors while taking demographic
random effects into consideration.
First, we highlight the exponential relationship between
the number of champions being used and matches being
played. We then study the relationship between champions
and match behaviors by modeling champion attributes and
playing behaviors from each other. For instance, results show
that champions with low control rating and utility rating
but high damage rating are expected to have more killing
behaviors. Second, we investigate the relations between a
player’s personality and game aspects (including impersonated
champions and corresponding match behaviors). Results show
significant associations among these factors. For example, we
observed that conscientious players prefer champions with
good control ability to face dangerous situations, and that the
nature of being careful makes these players more likely to win.
Future work will be devoted to overcoming some limitations of the current study. We plan to collect more data
as the current analysis is based on the data of 811 players.
Despite this amount of participants is sufficient from the
psychological perspective of personality analysis, it limits
us from applying complex machine learning models as well
as conducting more nuanced analysis (e.g., considering the
change of match statistics when champions fill different roles,
comparing performance of low-rank and high-rank players).
A bigger and more diverse dataset will also allow overcoming
problems due to misbehavior of survey participants. LoL is
a worldwide game, but we mainly spread our personality
questionnaires in US websites and Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Thus the demographics of participants are not universally
balanced. For future work, we will improve the recruitment
of participants to have broader samples.
In conclusion, we firmly believe that the results of our work
could benefit both companies and players. The former could
develop customized game characters or carry out personalized
recommendations based on players’ historical match behaviors. The latter would have access to a way of understanding
how their personalities affect game behaviors, thus having
insights of how to successfully assemble teams and develop
reasonable strategies during the match.
REFERENCES
[1] Shoshannah Tekofsky, Pieter Spronck, Aske Plaat, and Plaat@uvt.
Psyops: Personality assessment through gaming behavior. In the 8th
International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games, 2013.
[2] Narnia C. Worth and Angela S. Book. Personality and behavior in a
massively multiplayer online role-playing game. Computers in Human
Behavior, 38:322 – 330, 2014.
[3] P.G. Schrader Randy Boone Michael P. McCreery, S. Kathleen Krach.
Defining the virtual self: Personality, behavior, and the psychology of
embodiment. Computers in Human Behavior, 28(3):976 – 983, 2012.
[4] Daniele Quercia, Michal Kosinski, David Stillwell, and Jon Crowcroft.
Our twitter profiles, our selves: Predicting personality with twitter. pages
180–185, 10 2011.
[5] Golnoosh Farnadi, Geetha Sitaraman, Shanu Sushmita, Fabio Celli,
Michal Kosinski, David Stillwell, Sergio Davalos, Marie-Francine
Moens, and Martine De Cock. Computational personality recognition
in social media. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 26, 02
2016.
[6] League of Legends. The art of league of legends. https://universe.
leagueoflegends.com/en US/champions/.
[7] G. van Lankveld, P. Spronck, J. van den Herik, and A. Arntz. Games as
personality profiling tools. In 2011 IEEE Conference on Computational
Intelligence and Games (CIG’11), pages 197–202, Aug 2011.
[8] Nick Yee. The demographics, motivations, and derived experiences of
users of massively multi-user online graphical environments. Presence:
Teleoper. Virtual Environ., 15(3):309–329, June 2006.
[9] Lewis R. Goldberg, Dennis Sweeney, Peter F. Merenda, and John Edward Hughes. Demographic variables and personality: the effects of
gender, age, education, and ethnic/racial status on self-descriptions of
personality attributes. Personality and Individual Differences, 24(3):393
– 403, 1998.
[10] Mark Griffiths, Mark Davies, and Darren Chappell. Demographic factors
and playing variables in online computer gaming. Cyberpsychology &
behavior : the impact of the Internet, multimedia and virtual reality on
behavior and society, 7:479–87, 09 2004.
[11] John Suler. The online disinhibition effect. CyberPsychology &
Behavior, 7(3):321–326, 2004. PMID: 15257832.
[12] Joseph B Borders. Relationship between personality and video game
preferences. PhD thesis, 2012.
[13] Martin Delhove and Tobias Greitemeyer. The relationship between video
game character preferences and aggressive and prosocial personality
traits. Psychology of Popular Media Culture, 11 2018.
[14] Nick Yee, Nicolas Ducheneaut, Lester Nelson, and Peter Likarish.
Introverted elves & conscientious gnomes: the expression of personality
in world of warcraft. In CHI, 2011.
[15] Lindsay T. Graham and Samuel D. Gosling. Personality profiles
associated with different motivations for playing world of warcraft.
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 16(3):189–193,
2013. PMID: 23438267.
[16] Daniel Johnson and John Gardner. Personality, motivation and video
games. In Proceedings of the 22Nd Conference of the Computer-Human
Interaction Special Interest Group of Australia on Computer-Human
Interaction, OZCHI ’10, pages 276–279, New York, NY, USA, 2010.
ACM.
[17] Giel Lankveld, Sonny Schreurs, and Pieter Spronck. Psychologically
verified player modelling. pages 12–19, 01 2009.
[18] Wei Peng, Ming Liu, and Yi Mou. Do aggressive people play violent
computer games in a more aggressive way? individual difference and
idiosyncratic game-playing experience. CyberPsychology & Behavior,
11(2):157–161, 2008. PMID: 18422407.
[19] Jowon Park, Yosep Song, and Ching-I Teng. Exploring the links between
personality traits and motivations to play online games. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 14(12):747–751, 2011. PMID:
21780935.
[20] A. Sapienza, H. Peng, and E. Ferrara. Performance dynamics and
success in online games. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW), pages 902–909, Nov 2017.
[21] LOLESPORTS STAFF. 2018 mid-season. https://www.lolesports.com/
en US/articles/2018-mid-season-invitational-numbers.
[22] Ian Sheer. Player tally for ’league of legends’ surges. https://blogs.wsj.
com/digits/2014/01/27/player-tally-for-league-of-legends-surges/.
[23] LoL new player guide. New player guide (lol). https://na.
leagueoflegends.com/en/game-info/get-started/new-player-guide/.
[24] Samuel D Gosling, Peter J. Rentfrow, and William B Swann. A very
brief measure of the big-five personality domains. Journal of Research
in Personality, 37(6):504–528, 1 2003.
[25] J M Digman. Personality structure: Emergence of the five-factor model.
Annual Review of Psychology, 41(1):417–440, 1990.
[26] Heather E. P. Cattell. The original big five: A historical perspective. European Review of Applied Psychology/Revue Europenne de Psychologie
Applique, 46:5–14, 01 1996.
[27] Gijsbert Stoet. Psytoolkit: A software package for programming
psychological experiments using linux. Behavior Research Methods,
42(4):1096–1104, Nov 2010.
[28] Gijsbert Stoet. Psytoolkit: A novel web-based method for running online
questionnaires and reaction-time experiments. Teaching of Psychology,
44(1):24–31, 2017.
[29] Warren T. Norman. Toward an adequate taxonomy of personality
attributes: Replicated factor structure in peer nomination personality
ratings. Journal of abnormal and social psychology, 66:574–83, 07
1963.
[30] Douglas Bates, Martin Mchler, Ben Bolker, and Steve Walker. Fitting
linear mixed-effects models using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software,
Articles, 67(1):1–48, 2015.
[31] Douglas Bates, Martin Mchler, and Bin Dai. lme4: Linear Mixed-Effects
Models Using S4 Classes, volume 0.999375-33. 01 2011.
[32] R Development Core Team. R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. R. Found. Stat. Comput., 1, 01 2011.
[33] Andrew Gelman. Analysis of variance – why it is more important than
ever. Ann. Statist., 33(1):1–53, 02 2005.
[34] Gideon Schwarz. Estimating the dimension of a model. Ann. Statist.,
6(2):461–464, 03 1978.
[35] Robert E. Kass and Adrian E. Raftery. Bayes factors. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 90(430):773–795, 1995.
[36] Dr. Anthony Bean. Video gamers and personality: A five-factor model to
understand game playing style. Psychology of Popular Media Culture,
Online First Publication, 03 2014.
[37] Arthur Poropat. A meta-analysis of the five-factor model of personality
and academic performance. Psychological bulletin, 135:322–38, 04
2009.