Linguistic Analysis of Toxic Behavior in an
Online Video Game
Haewoon Kwak
† and Jeremy Blackburn
‡
†Qatar Computing Research Institute, Doha, Qatar
hkwak@qf.org.qa
‡Telefonica Research, Barcelona, Spain
jeremyb@tid.es
Abstract. In this paper we explore the linguistic components of toxic
behavior by using crowdsourced data from over 590 thousand cases of accused toxic players in a popular match-based competition game, League
of Legends. We perform a series of linguistic analyses to gain a deeper
understanding of the role communication plays in the expression of toxic
behavior. We characterize linguistic behavior of toxic players and compare it with that of typical players in an online competition game. We
also find empirical support describing how a player transitions from typical to toxic behavior. Our findings can be helpful to automatically detect
and warn players who may become toxic and thus insulate potential victims from toxic playing in advance.
Keywords: Toxic behavior
· verbal violence
· Tribunal
· League of Legends · cyberbullying · online games
1 Introduction
Multiplayer games provide players with the thrill of true competition. Players
prove themselves superior to other humans that exhibit dynamic behavior far
beyond that of any computer controlled opponent. Additionally, some multiplayer games provide another wrinkle: teamwork. Now, not only is it a test of
skill between two individuals, but cooperation, strategy, and communication between teammates can ensure victory. Unfortunately, the presence of teammates
and their influence on victory and defeat can result in toxic behavior.
Toxic behavior, also known as cyberbullying [1], griefing [4], or online disinhibition [7], is bad behavior that violates social norms, inflicts misery, continues to
cause harm after it occurs, and affects an entire community. The anonymity afforded by, and ubiquity of, computer-mediated-communication (CMC) naturally
leads to hostility and aggressiveness [3,8]. A major obstacle in understanding
toxic behavior is its subjective perception. Unlike unethical behavior like cheating, toxic behavior is nebulously defined; toxic players themselves sometimes fail
to recognize their behavior as toxic [6]. Nevertheless, because of the very real
impact toxic behavior has on our daily lives, even outside of games, a deeper
understanding is necessary.
arXiv:1410.5185v1 [cs.SI] 20 Oct 2014
2 Haewoon Kwak and Jeremy Blackburn
To further our understanding, in this paper we explore the linguistic components of toxic behavior. Using crowdsourced data from over 590 thousand
“judicial trials” of accused toxic players representing over 2.1 million matches
of a popular match-based competition game, League of Legends1
, we perform a
series of linguistic analyses to gain a deeper understanding of the role communication plays in the expression of toxic behavior. In our previous work [2], we
found that offensive language is the most reported reason across all the three regions. Also, in North America, verbal abuse is the second most reported reason.
In other words, linguistic components are a prime method of expressing toxicity.
From our analyses we draw several findings. First, the volume of communication is not uniform throughout the length of the match, instead showing a
bi-modal shape with peaks at the beginning and end of a match. By comparing
the distribution of frequency of communications between normal players and
toxic players, we find subtle differences. Typical players chat relatively more at
the beginning of a match, which is mainly for ice breaking, morale boosting, and
sharing early strategic information. In contrast, toxic players chat less at the
beginning but constantly more than typical players after some time point, i.e.
phase transition. Next, we find discriminative uni- and bi-grams used by typical
and toxic players, as signatures of them, examine the differences, and show that
certain bi-grams can be classified based on when they appear in a match. Temporal patterns of the linguistic signature of toxic players illustrate what kind
of toxic playing happens as the match progresses. Deeper analysis of temporal
analysis of words used by toxic and typical players reveals a more interesting picture. We focus on how a player transitions to toxic by comparing the temporal
usage of popular uni-grams between typical players and toxic players.
Our contribution is two-fold. First, we characterize linguistic behavior of
toxic players and compare it with that of typical players in online competition
games. Second, we find empirical support to describe how a player turns to be
toxic. Our findings would be helpful to automatically detect and warn players
who may turn to be toxic and thus save potential victims of toxic playing in
advance.
2 Dataset
The League of Legends (LoL) is the most popular Multiplayer Online Battle
Arena out today, and suffers from a high degree of toxic behavior. The LoL
Tribunal is a crowdsourced system for determining the guilt of players accused
of tocix behavior.
We collected 590,311 Tribunal cases from the North America region representing a total of 2,107,522 individual matches. Each Tribunal case represents
a single player and includes up to 5 matches in which he was accused of toxic
behavior. In LoL players can communicate via chat, which is ostensibly used to
share strategic plans and other important information during the game. However, chat is also a prime vector for exhibiting toxic behavior. Thus, although
1 http://leagueoflegends.com
Linguistic Analysis of Toxic Behavior in an Online Video Game 3
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0 25 50 75 100
Normalized Time
PDF
offender typical
Fig. 1. Change of chat volume during a match.
a variety of information is presented to Tribunal reviewers [2], in this paper we
focus exclusively on the in-game chat logs.
We extract 24,039,184 messages from toxic players and 33,252,018 messages
from typical players. Because the teammates of toxic players are directly impacted by toxic playing and readily express aggressive reactions to a toxic player,
we define typical players as the set of players on the opposite team when none
of them report the toxic player.
Before continuing, we report some basic statistics about the size of vocabulary
and the length of messages. We found 1,042,940 unique tokens in toxic player
messages and 1,176,356 unique tokens in typical player messages. While typical
players send 38% more messages than toxic players, the messages are composed
of only 13% more unique tokens. Interestingly, we find that toxic players send
longer messages than typical players; the average number of words per message
is 3.139 and 2.732 for toxic and typical players, respectively.
3 Chat Volume over a Match
We begin our analysis by exploring chat volume over time. A LoL match can
be broken up into logical stages. First is the early game (also known as the
“laning phase”), where characters are low level and weak. In the early game,
players expend great effort towards “farming” computer controlled minions to
gain experience and gold, with aggressive plays against the other team usually
coming as the result of an over extension or other mistake. As players earn gold
and experience, they level up and become stronger, and the match transitions to
the mid game. During the mid game, players become more aggressive and tend
to group up with teammates to make plays on their opponents. Finally, once
players are reaching their maximum power levels, the match transitions into
the end game, where teams will group together and make hard pushes towards
taking objectives and winning the match.
4 Haewoon Kwak and Jeremy Blackburn
While these phases are not dictated by the programming of LoL, and thus
there is no hard cut off point for when the transitions between phases occur,
we suspect that each phase has an associated pattern of communication. Thus,
in Figure 1 we plot the density of chat messages written by toxic and typical
players as a function of the normalized time during a match. The plot confirms
our suspicions: communication is not uniform throughout the match. Instead,
we see three distinct levels of communication, likely corresponding to the three
phases of a match, with relative peaks at the beginning and end of the match.
This finding can be explained with a deeper understanding of how a LoL
match progresses. As mentioned above, in the early game players are relatively
weak and must focus on farming for resources. Early game farming occurs via
players choosing one of three lanes to spend their time in. The lanes are quite
far from each other on the map (10+ seconds or so to travel between them) and
thus players on the same team tend to be relatively isolated from each other. To
take advantage of this isolation, and to get an early lead, players might roam
from the lane they chose to play in to another lane. In turn, this provides their
teammate in the other lane with a numbers advantage over opposing player in
the lane. Colloquially, this roaming to provide a temporary numbers advantage
is known as a “gank.” To deal with ganks in the early game, players tend to
communicate via chat when the opposing player in their lane has gone missing.
As the match transitions to mid game, teammates start grouping up. Since
they are no longer so isolated the fear of ganks dissipates, and the need to communicate missing players diminishes. Additionally, since teammates are grouped
together, they are seeing the same portion of the map, and there is not really
that much additional information they can convey to each other.
Finally, as late game comes around, teams must focus and work together to
complete objectives and win the match. In practice, this might involve coming to
agreement on a final “push” for an objective, or agreeing on which lane the team
should travel down. Also, there are some customs in e-sports, saying ‘gg (good
game)’ at the end of the game. The sharp spikes contain those messages as well.
While this might explain some of the spike seen at the end of Figure 1 another,
simpler explanation is that players are simply communicating their (dis)pleasure
in winning or losing the match.
A more interesting finding is the subtle difference in the distributions of
typical and toxic players. At the early stage we see more active communication
by normal players. We suppose that it includes all the messages for ice breaking
or cheering (e.g. gl (good luck) or hf (have fun)). However, at some point after
the short period, toxic players begin to chat more than typical players and keep
such pattern until by the last stage. At the last stage of the match, typical
players again chat more socially, for example, sending smile emoticons, which
are :D or :), and also saying gg, as we mentioned. The transition point, where
the distribution of toxic players cross over that of typical players, is a basis of
our further analysis in Section 5.
Linguistic Analysis of Toxic Behavior in an Online Video Game 5
Fig. 2. Top 10 discriminative uni- and bi-grams
4 Discriminative Words of Toxic and Typical Players
The linguistic approach to the chat log characterizes toxic players with context.
We conduct n-gram analysis because it is intuitive and straightforward. We filter
the stopwords and then count the frequency of uni- and bi-grams from the chat
log involving toxic reports of either verbal abuse or offensive language.
In order to find discriminative n-grams of toxic players we need a reference
for comparison. We conduct the same n-gram analysis from enemy’s chat log
when verbal abuse or offensive language is not reported from the enemies. We
consider it as a normal conversation among players and call those enemies typical
players. We create the top 1,000 uni- and bi-grams for toxic and typical players,
respectively. We find 867 uni- and 748 bi-grams in common. Then we obtain 133
non-overlapped uni- and 252 bi-grams for toxic and typical players; they appear
only in either toxic or typical players. We define them as discriminative uni- and
bi-gram for toxic and typical players, respectively.
Figure 2 shows top 10 discriminative uni- and bi-grams of toxic and typical
players. Top 10 discriminative uni- and bi-grams of toxic players are filled with
bad words. That is, Riot Games does not offer even the basic level of bad word
filtering, and such bad words can be used as the signatures of toxic players
who used verbal abuse or offensive language. We find that several discriminative
bi-grams of typical players are about strategies, while most of toxic players’ bigrams are bad words. We note that some variations of ‘fucking’ are discriminative
uni-grams but ‘fucking’ itself is not. It means that ‘fucking’ is often used not only
by toxic players but also by typical players as well. This shows the difficulties of
filtering bad words by a simple dictionary-based approach.
As the next step of the linguistic approach, we are interested in when verbal abuse occurs from a temporal perspective during a match. We divide 252
discriminative bi-grams of toxic players into three classes, early-, mid-, and latebi-grams, based on when their highest frequencies occur.
Figure 3 presents an example of three temporal classes of bi-grams. Interestingly, 209 (82.94%) out of 252 bi-grams are late-bi-gram. The early-bi-gram “ill
6 Haewoon Kwak and Jeremy Blackburn
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Normalized time
Scaled density
ill feed fucking bot report noob
Fig. 3. Example of early-, mid-, and late-bi-gram
feed” is a domain specific example of toxic behavior. In LoL, one of the ways
players earn gold and experience during a match is by killing players on the
opposite team. Intentional feeding is when a player deliberately allows the other
team to kill them, thus “feeding” the enemies with gold and experience, in turn
allowing them to become quite powerful.
The mid-bi-gram “fucking bot” is the toxic player expressing his displeasure
for the performance of the bottom lane. The bottom lane is usually manned
by characters that have a primarily late-game presence, and thus being behind
during the mid-game has a significant impact on the remainder of the match.
Most verbal abuse of toxic players occurs in the late stage of the game. For
example, “report noob” is the toxic player requesting that the rest of his team
report a player (the “noob”) that he singled out for his ire. We believe the most
likely explanation for this is that verbal abuse is most likely a response to losing
a game, which is often not apparent until the late-game. For example, consider
a scenario where one player on the team has a bad game, perhaps making poor
decisions resulting in the enemy team becoming quite strong. In the early-, and
even mid-game phases, a toxic player might still be able to hold his own, however,
when the enemy team groups up and makes coordinated pushes in the late-game,
their relative strength will often result in quick and decisive victories in teamfights. If toxic playing can be detected in real-time, we could protect potential
victims from verbal violence, for example via alerts or simply not delivering such
messages.
Temporal dynamics of bi-grams might help to create a mental model of toxic
players. For instance, 10 bi-grams containing ‘bot’ are divided into 1 early-bigram, 5 mid-bi-grams, and 4 late-bi-grams. Through manual inspection, we confirm that the early-bi-gram (‘go bot’) is strategic and non-aggressive, the mid-bigrams are cursing, and the late-bi-grams are blaming the result of the match on
the bot player(s). This provides us with a rough idea of how toxic players might
behave and think over time: initially they have a similar mindset as typical play-
Linguistic Analysis of Toxic Behavior in an Online Video Game 7
Fig. 4. Time difference of last used time of uni-gram
ers, but, as the game plays out contrary to their desires, they grow increasingly
aggressive, eventually lashing out with purely abusive language. We leave more
sophisticated modeling of toxic players’ thought process as future work.
5 Phase Transition of Toxic Players
In the previous section we recognize which words are exclusively used by toxic
and normal players. However, some words are used by both toxic players and
normal players. For these, the emerging patterns in a temporal sense could be
quite different. If we assume that toxic players exhibit toxic behavior in reaction to certain events happening during the match, then the linguistic behavior
of such toxic players should be the same as typical players before those events
happen.
To validate the above hypothesis, we conduct the following experiment which
is focused on finding some words that are not used after some time point by
toxic players, while they are continuously used by normal players. We extract
the top 30 uni-gram at every normalized time unit (ranging from 0 to 100) for
toxic players and normal players, respectively. Since top 30 uni-grams are quite
stable during the match, we obtain unique 80 uni-gram for toxic players and 91
uni-grams for normal players. We first observe that toxic players have slightly
smaller vocabularies than that by normal players. For each of these uni-grams,
we compute the normalized time of last use by toxic players and normal players,
respectively. Finally, we compute the difference of the last used time between
toxic and normal players for the common uni-grams.
Figure 4 lists the uni-grams with a time difference greater than 30. I.e., words
in the list are used later into the match by normal players. Some interesting
patterns are present in the results.
First, emoticons, particularly smile emoticons, are almost never used by toxic
players. Second, apologies (e.g., ‘sorry’) are also exclusively used by normal players. Third, some words for strategic team maneuvers (e.g., ‘come’, ‘ult’, ‘blue’,
‘ward’) are used by toxic players, but this ceases at some point during the match.
Fourth, some words primarily used for communicating movements with partners
in the same lane (e.g. ‘back’, ‘b’, ‘brb’ (be right back), ‘omw’ (on my way), ‘k’
8 Haewoon Kwak and Jeremy Blackburn
(okay)) are also used by toxic players, but again, after some point toxic players
stop this form of communication. Fifth, toxic players stop praising (e.g., ‘gj’
(good job)) their teammates after some point in time.
All these findings reveal how toxicity is born during a match. It seems to be
a kind of phase transition. They behave the same as normal players during the
early stage of the match, but at some point they change their behavior. After
some point, they utter neither apologies nor praise to express their feelings, and
also stop strategic communication with team members.
By combining this finding with discriminative words of toxic players, we see
the possibility for detecting a certain point that a player transitions to be toxic
without using detailed in-game action logs, but just chat logs. Thus, linguistic
analysis of toxic players shows not just how different they are and when they
become different as well.
6 Conclusion and Future work
In this work we have examined crowdsourced data from 590 thousand cases of
accused toxic players in a popular match-based competition game, League of
Legends. We have performed a series of linguistic analyses to gain a deeper understanding of the role communication plays in the expression of toxic behavior.
We have several interesting findings: a bi-modal distribution of chats during a
match, a difference between temporal chat patterns between toxic and typical
players, a list of discriminative uni- and bi-grams used by typical and toxic players as signatures of them, temporal patterns of the linguistic signature of toxic
players, and a possible footprint of transitions from typical behavior to toxic behavior. Our findings would be helpful to automatically detect and warn players
who may turn to be toxic and thus save potential victims of toxic playing in
advance.
Finally, we suggest several directions for future work. First, is focusing on
interaction between typical and toxic players. In this work the unit of our analysis
is a message, but we do not delve into the flow of messages. Interaction analysis
could reveal more clear narratives of how a player transitions to toxic behavior.
Next, is building a pre-warning system to detect toxic playing earlier. The main
challenge here is to build a dictionary of words that are signs of toxic playing.
As we have seen a list of discriminative uni- and bi-grams of toxic and typical
players, some bad words are also used by typical players as well. This behavior is
prevalent in “trash talk” culture, and an important factor in immersing players
in a competitive game [5]. Thus, any pre-warning system must be effective in
detecting toxic playing while being flexible enough to allow for trash talk to
avoid breaking the immersive gaming experience. We believe that the signature
of toxic and typical players we found is a first step for building the dictionary
for a pre-warning system.
Linguistic Analysis of Toxic Behavior in an Online Video Game 9
References
1. J. Barli´nska, A. Szuster, and M. Winiewski. Cyberbullying among adolescent bystanders: role of the communication medium, form of violence, and empathy. Journal
of Community & Applied Social Psychology, 23(1):37–51, 2013.
2. J. Blackburn and H. Kwak. Stfu noob!: Predicting crowdsourced decisions on toxic
behavior in online games. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
World Wide Web, WWW ’14, pages 877–888, 2014.
3. V. H.-H. Chen, H. B.-L. Duh, and C. W. Ng. Players who play to make others
cry: The influence of anonymity and immersion. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Advances in Computer Enterntainment Technology, ACE ’09, pages
341–344, 2009.
4. T. Chesney, I. Coyne, B. Logan, and N. Madden. Griefing in virtual worlds: causes,
casualties and coping strategies. Information Systems Journal, 19(6):525–548, 2009.
5. O. B. Conmy. Trash Talk in a Competitive Setting: Impact on Self-efficacy, Affect,
and Performance. ProQuest, 2008.
6. H. Lin and C.-T. Sun. The ”white-eyed” player culture: Grief play and construction
of deviance in mmorpgs. In Proceedings of DiGRA 2005 Conference, 2005.
7. J. Suler. The online disinhibition effect. Cyberpsychology & behavior, 7(3):321–326,
2004.
8. P. Thompson. Whats fueling the flames in cyberspace? a social influence model.
Communication and cyberspace: Social interaction in an electronic environment,
pages 293–311, 1996.